This section covers the ways in which different parts of the hiring process lead to different kinds of questions and different styles of analysis.  We use the same word for a 40-minute first contact call and for a grueling all-day round of meetings with a dozen people, but those are really two very different kinds of "interview" with different purposes and different rules.

## Screening
Some interviews are really intended for **screening**. These kinds of conversations are about making sure that the candidate is broadly suitable for the job on offer: Are they familiar with the technologies they'll need to work with? Do they understand the basics of a problem domain? Will they be able to avoid with common pitfalls? 

A screening conversation is to some extent a pass-fail situation. They goal of screening is not to waste either the candidate's or the interview team's time on an interview that is unlikely to result in an offer. If you need a character rigger but for some reason you're talking to a shader artist for the role, it's not an act of kindness to move them along to an interview with the character team that's going to be unpleasant for both sides. Thus, screening conversations tend to put more emphasis on previous experience and knowledge.

That said, though, experience and knowledge are never the only things a good interview is about, even in a screening conversation. 

It's vital for the interviewer to be on the look out for **potential** as well as experience. Probably the most common temptation in hiring is the hope -- usually, a vain hope -- that a candidate will walk in the door who has done a great job in essentially the precise role described in the job description. That sounds great, but in practice it's quite rare. If your screening process is too aggressive, you'll miss out on a lot of great candidates who _could_ fill the role quickly if not on day one. Over-indexing on precise experience also tends to reduce the diversity of your candidate pool because you've essentially delegated a lot of the search to an earlier, more homogenous version of the industry. If we hearken back to the analogy of house-hunting: you should be willing to try a neighborhood that didn't make your short list -- one extra conversation is a small price to pay for finding an up-and-coming prospect.

It's certainly not easy to simultaneously respect the tangible value of existing experience and skills while also remaining open to candidates who have the potential to excel in a role they have not held before. It does get easier, however, if you're rigorous about the distinction between the skills that are essential and those which might be helpful but aren't critical to the success. Hiring a shader artist to rig characters is probably a risky choice (though even there: is this a situation where switch-hitting could be valuable?) but hiring a Maya rigger for your Blender-based project is far less of a gamble. Likewise, it's nice if that rigger has Unreal experience for your Unreal project -- but is it really vital? Is it really important that somebody has shipped a big-budget title rather than working on smaller productions? What magical thing happens with 5 years of industry experience that never happens in year 4? 

Before you add a criterion to your job ad or put it on your shortlist of screening questions spend some extra effort to make sure it's important enough. Even if the desire to build a more inclusive team doesn't motivate you, the desire to fill that empty headcount might: every additional must-have trims people off your candidate pool, and that means you may add a few weeks or months before the oh-so-exquisitely right candidate materializes.

The same set of considerations applies to how the kinds of questions you ask in screening sessions. It is obviously important to get at the candidate's skillset and familiarity with the the field. You may want to ask about a lot of very concrete things: familiarity with a given API, or knowledge of some aspect of 3D math, or experience with a particular programming language. Be careful though to distinguish between the kind of surface knowledge that could be picked up on the job from foundational knowledge that takes months or years to acquire. Even in these comparatively cut-and-dried context the analogy of the final exam is not really appropriate: most tech artists excel at self-teaching, so the real question is not "do they know this one vital thing?" but "how far is this person from the level of productivity we need right now?"

You will often find, when asking screening questions that do have black-and-white answers, that candidates tend to shut down when they are asked a question which they will perceive as "failing." If you ask something binary "can you write C++?" and the answer is "no," the candidate will often panic and have trouble answering more questions, thinking that they have somehow "blown" the interview. It's both humane and more productive to give them an overview ahead of time of the way technical or experiental questions will be used. It can also be useful to explain why a given piece of technical knowledge is relevant for the job and ask the candidate if they have had to learn something similar in the past. This helps get the interview back on track by allowing them to provide some more positive information and hopefully to demonstrate the ability to learn on the fly -- the most valuable and most universal attribute of any tech artist. 

The final outcome of a screening interview is simple. If the candidate is a plausible-enough fit, it's time to prepare for a final interview round; if not a polite but clear no-thank-you is the right thing to do. Ghosting is not an adult alternative: if you can take the time to talk to somebody, you can at least email them a polite decline instead of leaving them hanging. Offering to make yourself available for followup questions is a nice extra -- often candidates make the same mistake as interviewers of thinking an interview is like a high school final, to be "passed" or "failed." Giving them a clear explanation of how your needs and their skillset don't line up can help them understand that they have not screwed up, they simply don't happen to be right for this particular circumstance.

### Final interviews

The screening interview is really there to set up a second round of interviews. In most companies these days, a candidate who passes the screen will be moved on to meetings with broader selection of potential future colleagues who will look at a candidate from multiple different angles. Some hiring managers are tempted to skimp on this part of the process, that's a mistake. A good round of grouop interviews is good for eliciting information that could easily be missed by a solo interviewer and for making sure that a diverse range of concerns are represented in the final hiring decisions.

"Team fit" interviews have a bad name in a lot of circles because, when done poorly, they often degenerate into "social similarity" interviews instead -- an obstacle both to inclusion and to building robust teams. This question bank was written in large part to help interviewers who are _not_ hiring managers learn how to focus on the highest-value parts of the conversation and the nature of the hiring process itself. 

The most valuable questions you can ask in a final round are ones which shed light on a candidate's way of working, not just on the the technical details of this or that situation. For this reason most of the questions in the question bank are designed as open-ended story-base questions, typically with a lead in like "tell me about a time when..." Most candidates will tend to focus on the minutia of particular technical or workplace situations but as they do so they frequently reveal a tremendous amount about themselves and their attitudes about teamwork. You will never know for certain whether the lead engineer at the candidate's last job was really a jerk, or whether the art director really didn't know anything about 3d graphics, but attention to the details of how the stories are told should tell you a lot about how the person sitting in front of you handles the complexities of a high-pressure job in a fluid business studded with challenging personalities. The goal is to try to form an evidence-based picture of how this person fit into your team and your workplace. One of the great virtues of story questions is that they put the candidate in charge of creating that image for you in their own words, which can be a vital corrective to the stories that your brain will otherwise tend based to spin based on their accent, their appearance, or their list of shipped titles. Active listening is a key way to avoid biases in hiring.

Scenario-based questions or role-plays are also extremely valuable questions, but they need to be approached with caution. If a scenario showcases the candidate's thinking about the kind of complex, ambiguous problems tech artists face every day, if it allows them to demonstrate creativity and ask smart questions, it's a great way to understand their professional mindset. On the other hand if the scenario drifts in the direction of a live-coding exercise or conveys the idea that there's one right answer and they are going to be judged on whether or not they've correctly divined it the interview is likely to go down an unprofitable path. It's vital to surround any scenario questions with a healthy scaffolding of "there's no right answer" and "we really just want to see how you think through this" so that candidates don't panic or freeze up if the question is too far outside their wheelhouse. It can be useful to prepare more than one scenario and allow the candidate to pick: not only does this reduce the "final exam" pressure a bit, the choice of one scenario over another can also tell you a lot about the candidate's mindset. 

In a final interview loop its often nice to have different people play conflicting roles in the scenario -- for example, if you want to walk a candidate through the business of designing a procedural environment pipeline, it can be interesting if different interviewers represent different points of view that don't line up well. When the would-be "art director" is extremely concerned with hand control but the "producer" insists on fast turnarounds and the "tech lead" is unwilling to surrender a lot of overnight server time, you get an opportunity to see how the candidate will react to the messy, ambiguous kind of problems that are the heart of what we do. However pulling this off requires good coordination and at least a little bit of rehearsal.

### The roundup

The last step in an interview process is the roundup or post-mortem (not, one might note, the most optimistic name). Here the hiring manager and the interview team 

----------


